Actual vs YNAB blog post (#378)
actualbudget/docs: blog/2024-07-01-ynab_v_actual.md

# Running the Applications

This may be the place were Actual and YNAB are the most different.
YNAB is a service. This means that the user has minimal control over the application and data.
This also means that YNAB owns your budget data.  They say that they keep it safe, but that could change any time they want to.
Because of this service model YNAB also has a continuing fee.
Your budgets are not available offline since you need to access YNAB's web page to see your budget.

Actual is Free and Open-Source.
This means that there is no cost for the core software (extras like bank syncing may have a fee from the provider).
If you don't want to use bank syncing, or it is not available in your region, there is no cost!
No cost to download, no cost to use, no cost for updates.
You are also free to modify the application in any way you want.

Because Actual is not a service we never see your budget data.  
It is controlled by you and it lives entirely on your devices and your server if you host one.
This makes the data available offline since it is always on your device.

### How to run Actual

Actual has a few options for running the software.

> The easiest to start is to install the desktop application or try the web demo.

Reviewer: A link to the web demo would be good here.

Long term you should consider also hosting your own sync server.  Considerations for the sync server are added below.

#### Desktop Application
The desktop application can be found at our [github release page](https://github.com/actualbudget/actual/releases/latest).
Download the file that matches your operating system.  
The `.exe` for Windows, the `.dmg` for Mac, or one of the Linux options.

#### Web version
You can try out Actual using the [web demo](https://app.actualbudget.org) on any device.
This link can be used long term if you are exclusively on mobile and don't have a sync server.
The data will be stored on your device and we wont have any access to it.

> If you plan to do this make sure to export you data sometimes as a backup (this can be done in the budget settings).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you plan to do this make sure to export you data periodically as a backup (this can be done in the budget settings).
```

The server is what allows syncing your budget file between devices and allows for bank syncing.
A full list of what does and does not require the sync server can be found [in this table](../docs/install).
The [docs page](../docs/install/) also includes information about options for hosting a sync server.

The quickest way to host a sync server is [to use PikaPods](https://www.pikapods.com/pods?run=actual).
PikaPods is a hosting service that costs just over one dollar a month to host a personal sync server[^1].
This can be set up in minutes and provides a private sync server for your data, along with a copy of the web client for you to use on any device.
Other options include hosting your own with docker or node.js, or using some other hosting service.

# Core Feature Comparison

## Budgeting
The core budgeting style is where Actual and YNAB are the most similar.
Both use envelope style budgeting, sometimes referred to zero-sum budgeting.
This means that all your funds are assigned to categories, or "jobs" in YNAB vernacular.
The budgeting styles are so similar you can [import your YNAB data into Actual](../docs/migration/nynab) and move on like almost nothing changed.

> How accounts and transactions are handled is basically the same as well.  There are transactions with payees, notes, categories, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How accounts and transactions are handled is similar.  There are transactions with payees, notes, categories, etc.
```

### Credit Cards
This is the one place where YNAB and Actual differ in budgeting.
YNAB automagically handles credit cards for you.

> This can be nice sometimes, annoying others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some users prefer this approach while others find it annoying.
```

The way YNAB handles this can make it a bit too easy to hold onto credit card debt and let it build up.
Actual needs some more deliberate handling of that debt.
Our docs [show how to do this in Actual](../docs/budgeting/credit-cards).
The tl;dr is that you put your existing debt in a category on your budget and any new debt has to be manually added into that category.
Principal and interest payments, get categorized into this category.
If you use credit cards, but don't carry any debt, the don't worry, you don't have to do anything special.
Envelope budgeting handles that process natively by using funds budgeted in your categories and paying off your balance.

## Reports

YNAB has a few simple reports but nothing especially exciting.
On the other hand, Actual has a full Custom Report engine for generating as many special purpose reports as you can think of.
We have options for bar charts, line charts, area graphs, donut graphs, and data tables.
These custom reports can be saved for later and get added to your personal report dashboard!

Here is an example of the kind of granularity you can achieve with these custom reports.

> This report is viewing how much was spent on food, by week, in both the `Food` and `Restaurant` categories over the last few months.

Reviewer: It's been a while since I used YNAB.  I don't remember seeing reports in the mobile app (maybe that's changed?).  Actual most certainly lets you view those reports on your phone.  Might be worth pointing out.

## Goals and Budget Automation

YNAB has revamped its targets in recent months.
They are all a flavor of "save X funds every Y time period".
This can cover many different situations pretty well.
YNAB does also have indicator bars to show if the goal has been met, or progress towards that goal.

Actual currently is developing a feature that is similar to YNAB's targets we refer to as goal templates. 
Goal templates is more flexible and has more options than YNAB's targets.
A full write up of how they work can be found in the [Goal Templates Documentation](../docs/experimental/goal-templates).
Some notable goals that Actual has would be: goals based on scheduled expenses, percentage goals, remainder goals, and much more!

One big difference from YNAB to Actual currently is that in Actual goals are indicated as met or not on a monthly basis instead of a total basis.
This means that if you have a multi month goal to save $500 in the next 10 months, Actual would give you a met indication if you budget $50.
If you budget more than you needed, the goal will adjust each month so that the amount you need in the current month is always accurate.

> Here is an example of what these indications looks like for a met, incomplete, or overspent category.

Reviewer: met (green), incomplete (yellow), overspent (red)
